README.md, before:

# VCF to EA matrix
Repo compute EA matrix from VCF file. Code adapted from mu_calculator

## Installation
You can either use BigPipeline environment or follow these steps:
1. git clone https://github.com/cwbcm/vcf2mat.git
2. conda env create -f ./vcf2mat/environment.yml
3. conda activate vcf2mat


## Usage
Required arguments:
| Argument                | Descripion |
| ---------------------- |--------------------- |
| --VCF                | Path to annotated VCF file |
| --samples            |Path to file with sample IDs. There should be no header row |
| --maxaf  | Sets maximum allele frequency threshold, so mu will be calculated for variants with frequency less than this threshold |
| --savepath           | Path for output file |
| --cores              | Number of cpus to use |

Optional arguments:
| Argument                 | Descripion |
| ---------------------- |--------------------- |
| --Ann      | Variant annotation pipeline used (options: ANNOVAR, VEP / default: VEP) |
| --ref      | Genome reference (options: hg19, hg38 / default: hg38) |
| --GeneLength      | Path to gene length file. ( default: ./refs/gene_length.csv) |
| --chrX       | Whether to include (1) or exclude (0) sex chromosomes in analysis (options: 1, 0 / default: 1 )|



## Command line example
```bash
#set your working directory to mu_calculator
cd ./vcf2mat
#run vcf2mat.py
python vcf2mat.py --VCF Path/to/vcf_file.vcf.gz --samples Path/to/samples_file.csv --savepath save/directory/ --cores 20 --maxaf 0.01 --chrX 0
```

## Output
1. Output "mu.tsv" is a dataframe with gene names in the first column, mu of the cases in the second column and mu of the controls in the third column.
2. Output "distance_matrix.tsv" is a dataframe with gene names in the first column and distance (mu_control - mu_case) in the second column. The difference in mu for controls and cases for 1000 random shuffled labels are presented in column names "1" to "1000" and z-scores are presented in the last column.

Commit message:

Update CLI and documentation
Removed deprecated arguments and sample file requirement from vcf2mat.py, now inferring samples directly from VCF. Updated README to reflect new arguments, output details, and usage instructions. Simplified reference file selection logic and improved annotation support notes.

README.md, after:

# VCF to EA matrix
Repo compute EA matrix from VCF file. Code adapted from mu_calculator

## Installation
You can either use BigPipeline environment or follow these steps:
1. git clone https://github.com/cwbcm/vcf2mat.git
2. conda env create -f ./vcf2mat/environment.yml
3. conda activate vcf2mat


## Usage
Required arguments:
| Argument                | Descripion |
| ---------------------- |--------------------- |
| --VCF                | Path to annotated VCF file |
| --savepath           | Path for output file |
| --maxaf  | Sets maximum allele frequency threshold |
| --minaf  | Sets minimum allele frequency threshold |
| --cores              | Number of cpus to use |
| --output | Specify what EA matrices to output, use , to separate the outputs. E.g. sumEA,pEA,silent,maxEA |
| --format | Specify output file format (options: tsv, parquet). Parquet is recommended |

Optional arguments:
| Argument                 | Descripion |
| ---------------------- |--------------------- |
| --Ann      | Variant annotation pipeline used (options: ANNOVAR, VEP / default: VEP). Only VEP is currently supported |
| --ref      | Genome reference (options: hg19, hg38 / default: hg38) |
| --prefix   | Optional prefix to add before the EA matrices. If unspecified, sumEA_mat.parquet/tsv will be used |




## Command line example
```bash
#set your working directory to vcf2mat
cd ./vcf2mat
#run vcf2mat.py
python vcf2mat.py --VCF Path/to/vcf_file.vcf.gz --ref hg38 --savepath save/directory/ --cores 20 --maxaf 0.01 --format parquet
```

## Output
1. EA matrices (sumEA, pEA, maxEA or silent) for a given EA annotated vcf file. The genes are on the columns, while the samples are on the rows.
2. All samples in the vcf file will be included in the output. If only interested in a subset of samples, subset the vcf files first with bcftools.
3. Use custom reference files when only a subset of gene is of interest.
